"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the

that even the prim visitor could not help joining in.
against her mother and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter
managed to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned
"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha

produced from the folds of her frock.
and in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she
least attention to her severe remark- and began to laugh. She laughed,
flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla- not paying the
is not yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her
that charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child
legs in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers- was just at
her bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little
with childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life-

addressing the mother.
name day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added,
"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your

husband.
feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to her
"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with

is. My dear pet!"
"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day it

arms wide and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his

rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.
collar, an officer of the Guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plump
Behind her in the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat
evident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far.
frock, darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It was
girl of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her short muslin
running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a
suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls
smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
now rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,


CHAPTER XI





with us!" he said.
always eats well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine
form again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly

policeman cut!"
the young ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that
and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to
"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count;

hearing how ill he is."
pretext. The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich,
"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, that is a

some inspection business," remarked the visitor.
"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on

all to the fact.
my Bory's godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance at
Besides, Cyril Vladimirovich is my mother's second cousin. He's also
rubles! I know it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself.
Pierre or Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of
Petersburg- no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune,
so ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from
the Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death- and he is
count is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to
was saying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the
"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I

countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the

count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
half whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost
"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a

on in society.
evidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation,

"I should think he has a score of them."

The visitor made a gesture with her hand.

is illegitimate."
inattention. "His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also
turning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of
"Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess,

declined: I have my daughters to consider."
spite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite
done for him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in
well educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so
visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the

Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.

"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"

the count, dying with laughter.
"What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted

policeman on his back!"
into the Moyka Canal. And there was the bear swimming about with the
do? They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear
actresses! The police tried to interfere, and what did the young men
somewhere, put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some
woman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear
visitor. "He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy
"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the

"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.

affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
to Moscow. Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to get his son's
Dolokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back
to heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up
"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince

"You don't say so!" replied the countess.

things that he has been expelled by the police."
he liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible
"It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as
"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor.

Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the

him!"
bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill
"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such

Pavlovna's reception.
illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna
celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count Bezukhov, and about his
was on the chief topic of the day: the illness of the wealthy and
anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversation
Countess Apraksina... and then, again rustling, pass into the
dresses and say, "I am so delighted... Mamma's health... and
last out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of
the scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which
interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and
delighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices,
at the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so
"Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child...

daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling

sad voice, as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."
more. She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a
"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no

her husband's portrait on it.
countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with
gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. The
"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'

And with a complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room.
should be? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it."
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they
his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table
call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager of all
china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he would
people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in silver and
large marble dining hall, where tables were being set out for eighty
anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the
patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his way back from the
some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray hairs over his bald
man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see
sometimes in very bad but self-confident French; then again, like a
weather, or touched on questions of health, sometimes in Russian and
to live, he swayed to and fro with dignity, offered surmises about the
hands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows how
toward him or her, and jauntily spreading out his legs and putting his
to one of those who were still in the drawing room, drew a chair
quick, repeated bows. As soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned
clean-shaven face, the same firm pressure of the hand and the same
variation, and with the same expression on his full, cheerful,
mon cher!" These words he repeated to everyone without exception or
offended, ma chere! On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come,
name day we are keeping. But mind you come to dinner or I shall be
in rank- "I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose
variation in his tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him
called everyone without exception and without the slightest
"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"- he

count met the guests and saw them off, inviting them all to dinner.
considering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors. The
visitors. The young people were in one of the inner rooms, not
seated in the drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the
Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also
gave her a distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna
twelve. A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness,
type of face, evidently worn out with childbearing- she had had
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental

another in relays.
visitors who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one
and her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the
on the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house
morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
mother and the youngest daughter- both named Nataly. Ever since the
It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs- the

them on the march to Radzivilov.
and her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join
time. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August,
cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a
of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards as a
where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a regiment
relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when in the town and
Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went straight to her rich
endeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna Pavlovna's reception Anna
appointment to Kutuzov's staff despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's
Semenov Guards with the rank of cornet. He received, however, no
Emperor, an exception made, and Boris transferred into the regiment of
the evening of Anna Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the
Drubetskaya who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess


CHAPTER X





ground, and began dancing round the room with it.
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the

us."
"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with

now we are all going to -'s."
and I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but
"No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit

who touched him was sent flying.
They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone

out of the window.
the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb
"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging

you go giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.
"What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why,

"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.

bottle. I'll do it.... Bring a bottle!"
suddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he

the window sill.
money. Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the

take you!" came from different sides.
"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil

Dolokhov jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly.

"It's empty."

the window sill, with a pale but radiant face.
was aware of a stir all around. He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on
his eyes and thought he would never never them again. Suddenly he
window sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered
still more with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the
sloping ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm wavered
this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the
a backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously;
him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made
yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed to
emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting
higher and higher and trembled with the effort. The bottle was
touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the bottle was lifted
position, only his head was thrown further back till his curly hair
Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov still sat in the same
though his features now expressed horror and fear. All were still.
the wall. Pierre hid his face, from which a faint smile forgot to fade
to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to
pursing up his lips. The man who had wished to stop the affair ran
stood erect with staring eyes. The Englishman looked on sideways,
taking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov's back. Anatole
to pick up some broken glass remained in that position without
his free hand to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped
bottle and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the

there. Now then!"
separately through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down
"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words

arranged himself on his seat.
Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands,

Eh?... What then?... Eh?"
"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed.

Anatole stopped him.

man.
"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible

angry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
than the others present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared and
Englishman in front. Pierre stood smiling but silent. One man, older
head, were lit up from both sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the
already quite light. Dolokhov's back in his white shirt, and his curly
two candles and placed them on the window sill, though it was
right and then to the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought
adjusted himself on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the
lowered his legs. Pressing against both sides of the window, he
easily, Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it

jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad

stones of the pavement.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the

window sill, leaned over, and looked down.
of the Life Guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the
translating Dolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar
though he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to

does the same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"
to attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else
"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill

began repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
buttons of his coat and looking down at him- the Englishman was short-
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the

"Quite right," said the Englishman.

window) "and without holding on to anything. Is that right?"
this spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the
rum without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on
"All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of

"No, fifty," replied the latter.

addressing the Englishman.
imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he,
understand him, but he did, not speak it very well- "I bet fifty
"I bet fifty imperials"- he spoke French that the Englishman might

in the room. All were silent.
window sill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing those
Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the

the sky, the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
rum in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of
"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of

"Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole.

"Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov.

out with a crash.
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame

"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.

but could not move it. He smashed a pane.
to smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame,
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted

and shouts of the gentlemen around.
footmen, who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions
anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented

that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg.
he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were at
could play all games and nearly always won. However much he drank,
Anatole himself, respected him more than they did Anatole. Dolokhov
had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them, including
Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles, Dolokhov lived with him and
Dolokhov was a man of small means and no connections. Yet, though
produced an effect which made it impossible not to notice his face.
together with the resolute, insolent intelligence of his eyes,
played continually round the two corners of the mouth; this,
firmly on the firm lower one, and something like two distinct smiles
curved. The middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed
was clearly seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely
no mustache, so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face,
eyes. He was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore
Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue

particularly to Anatole and Pierre.
distinctly repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and

the window.
"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to

glass, "or I won't let you go!"
"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last

outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
naval officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the
while explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English
listening to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass
at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows

"First of all you must drink!"

taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole,

"I don't understand. What's it all about?"

him merrily.
and duelist, who was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about
Dolokhov, an officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler
ring, cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,

is Petya! Good man!" cried he, addressing Pierre.
linen shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here
who stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine
"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow

"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.

"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."

"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."

"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.

"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.

trying to set him at the others.
were romping with a young bear, one pulling him by the chain and
young men were crowding anxiously round an open window. Three others
the growling of a bear, and general commotion. Some eight or nine
third room came sounds of laughter, the shouting of familiar voices,
him, was drinking on the sly what was left in the glasses. From the
which were the remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw
dispersed. Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet

distance.
was a smell of alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the
anteroom; empty bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there
stairs, and went in at the open door. There was no one in the
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which

nullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went to Kuragin's.
the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort,
extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all
one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so
honor' are conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if
come to his gathering; "besides," thought he, "all such 'words of
because before he gave it he had already promised Prince Anatole to
occurred to him that his promise to Prince Andrew was of no account,
accustomed to that he decided to go. The thought immediately
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go

"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.

finishing with visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of.
cards that evening, after which there was generally a drinking bout,
remembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting the usual set for
more like morning or evening than night. On the way Pierre
light enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed
he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was
to drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more
cloudless, northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a


CHAPTER IX





"On my honor!"

"You give me your word of honor not to go?"

but I won't go."
head aches, and one spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight,
such a life I can't decide or think properly about anything. One's
thought, "seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading
"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy

reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
dissipated life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the

'women and wine' I don't understand!"
il faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women,
"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme

his shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging

badly- all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
visiting those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so
the same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up
our whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all
"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among

affectionate as it was- expressed a sense of his own superiority.
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance- friendly and

I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously."
present I am free and am all right. Only I haven't the least idea what
it really..." But he did not say what "it really" was. "For the
great effort to say this. "Without a name and without means... And
son!" He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a
relaxing into a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate
"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face

That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.

smiling at his reassuring thoughts.
talking about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence,
"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of

to wheels that they may run smoothly.
praise and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life,

defect but as a sign of strength.
himself was particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a
by Andrew's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he
at his capacity for work and study. And if Pierre was often struck
knew everything, and had an opinion about everything), but above all
extraordinary memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything,
astonished at Prince Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his
might be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always
highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which
friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the
"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his

thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he

everything before you, everything. And you..."
consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have
"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should

marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince Andrew.
something in them, but there's nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don't
colors! When you meet them in society it seems as if there were
in everything- that's what women are when you see them in their true
women in general! My father is right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial
those women... If you only knew what those society women are, and
to me. And that stupid set without whom my wife cannot exist, and
wit," continued Prince Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen
nothing and am fit for nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic
am now going to the war, the greatest war there ever was, and I know
triviality- these are the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I
torments you with regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and
all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and
up with a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And
nothing but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself
worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had
he (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
the whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said
"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is

almost morbid irritation.
ordinary times, the more impassioned he became in these moments of
brilliant light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at
which the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with
thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in
eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his
who had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski

to whom I mention this, because I like you."
would I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one
those rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what
"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of

his friend in amazement.
and the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different

waved his arm.
a court lackey and an idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he
except the drawing room, where you will be ranged side by side with
will feel at every step that for you all is ended, all is closed
If you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future, you
wasted on trifles. Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise.
all that is good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be
irrevocable mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing- or
have seen her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and
of, and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and
till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable
"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry

out.
has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak
Pierre had never before seen on his face, began to talk- as one who
elbows on the table and, with a look of nervous agitation such as
newly married. Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his
glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the
room. Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining

"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.

forehead with his small hand.
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre


CHAPTER VIII





as he would have done to a stranger.
"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand

hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one

its drooping tail.
timid, deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags
eyes glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty

which indicates that patience is exhausted.
"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch

restraining her angry tears.
"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without

the pleasure of spending the evening with you."
"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of

Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.

Good-by!"
outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself...
I myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! An
"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you

bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
to all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened

emphatically.
"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more

behave like that six months ago?"
"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you

regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an

war and have no pity for me. Why is it?"
have changed so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the
tearful grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a
"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little

and now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him

the room.
quivered. Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip

"You had better go."
"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew.

"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."

The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.

Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince

the gist of the matter lay in that.
she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a

be afraid."
"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to

"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.

alone in the country."
whim of his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up
"There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a

"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.

tone of frigid politeness.
besides Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone

and a shudder ran down her back.
significantly at her husband) "I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered,
be broken off... and then you know, Andre..." (she looked
"Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations must
ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.
spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly
said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had
"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of,"

"When are you starting?" he asked.

conversation, gave no reply.
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the

speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"
know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I were
everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp to the Emperor. You
Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed. "He is so well received
Apraksins' I heard a lady asking, 'Is that the famous Prince
known, so much appreciated by everyone. The other day at the
Uncle's aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well
it? Now you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he is
How is it that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need
it; I don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars.
"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand

quick.
The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the

intercourse with young women.
with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess
"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why he

fellow you are, Monsieur Pierre!"
saying so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative
How stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for
and fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married?
"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly

and politely placed a chair for her.
house dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose
from the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a
had had in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet
Andrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it
The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince


CHAPTER VII





me!"
paused. "I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit
"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He

"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.

"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."

Prince Andrew smiled ironically.

"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.

wars," he said.
"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no

other answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.
such nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any
words. He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish

the world is not right."
army; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the
tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to

talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us

had met that evening.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he

speaking. Pierre rubbed his forehead.
decided on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was
had already been choosing a career for three months, and had not
Write to me all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money.
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor,

"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."

other."
"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the

Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.

diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you

abstract conversation.
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such

power...."
do not know how to express it... not by a balance of political
the right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but- I
"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in

eager face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his

hands.
said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now,"

in the middle.
Caesar's Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it
took from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa,
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like


has to know how to deal with them."
were saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you

who gives himself the airs of a monarch."
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer
"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"

Hippolyte burst out laughing.
nice indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very
"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside

whom he had promised to take home.
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte

affectionately.
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and

disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold,

Hippolyte, under pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
dark carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the

well as with his feet.
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as

the carriage.
into the porch following the princess, whom a footman was helping into
fashion reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest

"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.

he seem.
her husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at

time, as though embracing her.
the shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long
from awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte

there."
up her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing

Delightful!"
Hippolyte "-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not?
"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince

usual spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as
the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and

face close to her, began to whisper something.
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his

revoir!"- and she left the hall.
"Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone.

sister-in-law.
she contemplated between Anatole and the little princess'
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match

a low voice.
princess, taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in
"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little

pregnant princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty,
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders

And everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
are opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am."
everybody saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again

dear Monsieur Pierre."
see you again, but I also hope you will change your opinions, my
expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion, nodded and said: "I hope to
Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, with a Christian mildness that
was, however, redeemed by his kindly, simple, and modest expression.
absent-mindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it
plume, till the general asked him to restore it. All his
own, the general's three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the
was absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his
something particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he
drawing room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say
huge red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, to enter a
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with

began to take their leave.
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests


CHAPTER VI





and when and where.
the last and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom,
anecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about
agreeably ending Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the
and the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so
told it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had

knew...."
longer and went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world
and her long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat

Pavlovna, did however smile.
narrator. Several persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna
before his audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long

calls.'"
livery, get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some
"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a

difficulty.
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with

her taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
must have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She

attention to his story.
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.
lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian
it. Excuse me, Vicomte- I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to

attend, and asking them all to be seated began:
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to


to go.
of Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness

other acts which it is difficult to justify."
where he gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are
was great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa
"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man

this reinforcement.
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of

So it seems to me."
between his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.
Andrew. "Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince

All were silent.
that this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested.
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly

to ask forgiveness.
another- a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed
his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by
His smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled.

"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.

little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the

all like the conduct of a great man!"
18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the

innocent and untried?"
fact of a great man executing a duc- or even an ordinary man who- is
"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the

vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator.
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the
not exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had
of Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the

On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
liberty and equality. Have people since the Revolution become happier?
does not love liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached
were, "high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who
last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at

Napoleon has retained in full force."
from prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas
important. What is important are the rights of man, emancipation
"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most

an ironical voice.
"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected

"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."

"Rousseau's Contrat social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

But won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that...

extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.
Pierre, betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his
great man. The Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur
might rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he

called him a great man," remarked the vicomte.
commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to

power."
of speech and of the press- and only for that reason did he obtain
preserved all that was good in it- equality of citizenship and freedom
because he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses,
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great

But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.

good, he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
alone understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled

his audience over his spectacles and continued.
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at

his knee with the palm of his hand.
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

her work nearer to her.
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing
"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

responsibility of that deed."
greatness of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole
a political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was

something inappropriate, she was unable to stop him.
conversation, and though Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say
appreciation of the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their

one hero less on earth."
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and
people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the

do not know how far he was justified in saying so."
Napoleon's words. "'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I
Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'"

remarks at him, though without looking at him.
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his

smile.
"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic

know the real state of French public opinion.
without looking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte

Bonaparte's side."
the conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into

will be difficult to return to the old regime."
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it
"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite

royalist emigrant.
arms of its rightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the
the usurper, the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the
choose their own form of government; and I believe that once free from
"has declared that he will leave it to the French people themselves to
always accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family,
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which

who had him under observation, interrupted:
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to

and then..."
society- I mean good French society- will have been forever destroyed,
too far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French
but follows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone
he is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the

The princess listened, smiling.

he.
"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d' azur- maison Conde," said

gravity as if she had asked him to do it.
coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Conde
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time

And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.

are sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper."
of their betrayal of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they
became more animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward
XVII, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he
but hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite

endure this man who is a menace to everything."
over," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run


*God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!


Italian: "'Dio mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"
fine when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!'* They say he was very

sarcastic smile.
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a

as if the whole world had gone crazy."
of the nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is
Monsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions
and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and
Milan?" asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at


CHAPTER V





task was accomplished.
pretended to listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her
returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking, and again
her face resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She
employed all the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit

naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,

"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."

"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"

"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"

"we shall be late."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,

"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."

adjutants."
all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as
since his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that
"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered

Prince Vasili smiled.

rest, and then..."
Kutuzov... recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at
she faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich
"Wait- just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..."

kindness!" He turned to go.
"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you- I knew your

Guards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
memory, I will do the impossible- your son shall be transferred to the
but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and

him.
after hour, and even to make scenes. This last consideration moved
are prepared if necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour
up their minds, will not rest until they have gained their end, and
that she was one of those women- mostly mothers- who, having once made
first steps in his career. Moreover, he could see by her manners
him of what was quite true; he had been indebted to her father for the
second appeal, something like qualms of conscience. She had reminded
his influence. But in Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her
he would soon be unable to ask for himself, he became chary of using
once realized that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him,
economized if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be

stood waiting by the door.
beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her

were," she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
Golitsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always
she added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked
do this for my son- and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,"
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to
anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for

tightly.
moment; then she smiled again and dutched Prince Vasili's arm more
her, an embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a
listening to the vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frightened
obtained an invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat
only son. It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had
come to Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of the

That would be the best way."
should advise you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn.
Prince Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered

would be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he

not go away.
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might
the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to

what news I may take back to my poor boy."
into the anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me
"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him

only anxiety and fear.
assumed had left her kindly and tearworn face and it now expressed
Prince Vasili in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had
had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook
his father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew


women."
Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever
whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society.
Pavlovna: "Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna

"Very," said Pierre.

"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.

almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly

leave your enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.
of a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to
his rising. "This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me
Frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent
"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the

daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
to say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his
hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished
"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre's

vicomte who was continuing his story.
with you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the
"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper

Pierre.
"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to

face he gave him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
with whoever was touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming
looked round Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance
glad, affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he
from the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who

been telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same

"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"

"She will go to the country."

"And Lise, your wife?"

pleased to take me as an aide-de-camp...."
last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the

"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.

the whole company.
face, kissed Anna Pavlovna's hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned
He turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome
tedious, none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife.
at or listen to them. And among all these faces that he found so
room, but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look
wife. It was evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing
measured step, offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little
Everything about him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet,
young man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features.
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew


CHAPTER IV





larger circle.
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more

of the climate," said he.
had the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the

with women.
affected, sugary expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing
Italian's face instantly changed and assumed an offensively
Pierre, asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at

"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.

save the world!"
object the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would
herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its
powerful nation like Russia- barbaric as she is said to be- to place
the people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of

which was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved.
theory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally,
the young man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet
about the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by
the rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe
was talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully

the story prevented her from going on with it.
into her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle

little princess.
"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the

looked agitated.
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point

death.
spared him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by
to which he was subject, and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter
his presence Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits
Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in
Paris to visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon
current, to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then

cuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
dressed in a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of
sure whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be

had uttered them.
which showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone

his shoulders.
"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging

instrument he could not begin to speak.
the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside

and his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
nose, and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace,
sullen self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes,
contrary was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of
and by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the
a joyous, self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation,
were like his sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by
in spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features
resemblance to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary

and moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle

took up her work.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she

her seat.
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking

of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking

The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.

face, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.
once adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of honor's
whenever the story produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at
necklace. From time to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and
still more beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond
round arm, altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her
story was being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful
considered a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and

smilingly inclining his head.
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he,

with her unchanging smile.
extraordinary when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also
his shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted

its effect.
victorious beauty. She seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish
the contrary she even appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too
lovely that not only did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on
ballroom with her as she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so
were very much exposed- and she seemed to bring the glamour of a
shapely shoulders, back, and bosom- which in the fashion of those days
allowing each the privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and
not looking at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously
sparkling diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her,
with moss and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and
beautiful woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed
which she had first entered the room- the smile of a perfectly
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with

another group.
beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the

The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.

on a hot dish.
and most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef
third; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest
another. "How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a
the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to
"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to of

to listen to his tale.
to comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness

the sound of that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
with a pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in
"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna,

particular reasons for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
d'Enghien had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were
the murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc
choice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing
up to her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly
it in the kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served
specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen
as a treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a
which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up
of politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
polished manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and

Pavlovna.
for her age. The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna
Princess Bolkonskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump
beautiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little
round the abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the
had settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed


CHAPTER III




people are fond of doing.
stood waiting for an opportunity to express his own views, as young
came up to Morio. Here the conversation seemed interesting and he
was always expecting to hear something very profound. At last he
self-confident and refined expression on the faces of those present he
missing any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the
a child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of
the intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like
Pavlovna's was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna

another group whose center was the abbe.
listen to what was being said there, and again when he passed to
anxious watch on him when he approached the group round Mortemart to
these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident. She kept an
conversational machine in steady, proper, and regular motion. But amid
too-noisy group, and by a word or slight rearrangement kept the
Pavlovna moved about her drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a
hastens to check the machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna
there one that creaks or makes more noise than it should, and
to work, goes round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or
flag. As the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands
ready to help at any point where the conversation might happen to
she resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch,
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave,

"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.

abbe's plan chimerical.
feet spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the
to another who wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big
before she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak
committed a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady
get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and

interesting but hardly feasible."
"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very

the Abbe Morio? He is a most interesting man."
Anna Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health.
Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the

acquaintance.
the little princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate
round as if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look

aunt as she conducted him to her.
invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor

in that drawing room.
and natural, expression which distinguished him from everyone else
could only have reference to the clever though shy, but observant
certainly rather bigger than the other men in the room, her anxiety
place, came over her face when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was
fear, as at the sight of something too large and unsuited to the
But in spite of this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and
the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room.
was his first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with
only just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with

Vasili to Anna Pavlovna.
"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince

turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she
to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in

else," replied Anna Pavlovna.
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone

dainty gray dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
And she spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed,
be quite a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed."
on me," she added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to
present. "Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick
my work," said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all
doing was a pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought
dress sat down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was
swaying steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her
The little princess went round the table with quick, short,

day.
white teeth, thought that they were in a specially amiable mood that
and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of her
becoming, like her, full of life and health. All who talked to her,
and talking to her a little while, felt as if they too were
dispirited young ones who looked at her, after being in her company
and health, and carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull
this pretty young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life
and peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of
of her upper lip and her half-open mouth- seemed to be her own special
the case with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect- the shortness
when she occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always
teeth, but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming
delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her
gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a

duty and did not return to her the whole evening.
the old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious
visitor, though politeness prevented his showing impatience, left
of Her Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each
them in the same words, about their health and her own, and the health
and solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of
them cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful
not one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom

Pavlovna mentioned each one's name and then left them.
arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna
had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to
her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who
aunt," or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my


*The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.


whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio and many others had also come.
receptions. Prince Vasili's son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart,
pregnant did not go to any large gatherings, but only to small
also there. She had been married during the previous winter, and being
Bolkonskaya, known as la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg,* was
her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess
father to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and
Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest


CHAPTER II





apprenticeship as old maid."
be arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
young Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can
"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise,

fro as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
the maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised

is rich and of good family and that's all I want."
slafe wigh an f, as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She
that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-
Pavlovna's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna

tonight."
Meinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here
unhappy. She has a brother; I think you know him, he married Lise
very clever but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very
under the late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is
is the well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army
"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He

we fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
five years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in
current of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad

movement of the head that he was considering this information.
and perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory

yours, Princess Mary Bolkonskaya."
person who is very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of
though I don't feel that weakness in myself as yet,I know a little
she asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?"

gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a

is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my

Pavlovna, looking up pensively.
father there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna
"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a

and unpleasant.
round his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse
in a way more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles
one. That is the only difference between them." He said this smiling
fools. Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active
a father could for their education, and they have both turned out
"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all

awaiting a reply. He frowned.
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,

Majesty's and you were pitied...."
face assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her
am dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her
"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I

lack the bump of paternity."
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

them less than anyone, and so you don't deserve to have them."
eyebrows. "Two such charming children. And really you appreciate
him," she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her
children? I don't speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like
joys of life are distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid
intimate conversation- "I often think how unfairly sometimes the
political and social topics were ended and the time had come for
to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that
"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

beautiful."
out everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came

so she said:
a man recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him,
Pavlovna wished both to rebuke him (for daring to speak he had done of
womanly and courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the

Funke beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an

sister," was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her

was pleased with.
nor anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she

for the baron.
were trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others

is a poor creature."
to be appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts
of his visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke
to him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive
he added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred
"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me,"

has been received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
ones. And also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He
the best French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good
who is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of
expecting two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart,
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am

give me a cup of tea?"
King of Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you
sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the
"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been

She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

monarch. He will save Europe!"
trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our adored
says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality is just a
is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a word that Hardenburg
always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and that all Europe
what little they have promised they will not perform! Prussia has
desires the good of mankind. And what have they promised? Nothing! And
self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for himself, but only
The English have not understood and cannot understand the
secret motive in our actions. What answer did Novosiltsev get? None.
refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and still seeks, some
understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness of soul. She has
on?... England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot
avenge the blood of the just one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely
ever in the person of this murderer and villain! We alone must
crush the hydra of revolution, which has become more terrible than
that God will not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and
perform the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble
the one thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to
sovereign recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is
She is betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious
things, but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war.
"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand

burst out:
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna

could, nor considered it necessary, to correct.
consciousness of her charming defect, which she neither wished, nor
round her lips expressed, as in a spoiled child, a continual
which, though it did not suit her faded features, always played
disappoint the expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile
did not feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to
enthusiast had become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she
years, overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an
stale part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a

burn ours."
Buonaparte has burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to
listless tone. "What has been decided? They have decided that
"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold,

dispatch? You know everything."
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's

force of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed.
have been put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would

festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these

coming for me to take me there."
must put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I

staying the whole evening, I hope?"
like these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times

irony could be discerned.
politeness and affected sympathy of which indifference and even
mind at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's

sofa.
scented, and shining head, and complacently seated himself on the
up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald,
man of importance who had grown old in society and at court. He went
thought, and with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a
in that refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but
stars on his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke
an embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had
least disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the

Annette Scherer."
terrible, I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10-
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too
"If you have nothing better to do, Count [or Prince], and if the

delivered by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and

St. Petersburg, used only by the elite.
she said, suffering from la grippe; grippe being then a new word in
reception. Anna Pavlovna had had a cough for some days. She was, as
of high rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her
Fedorovna. With these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man
Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna

I have frightened you- sit down and tell me all the news."
my 'faithful slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see
nothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer
that Antichrist- I really believe he is Antichrist- I will have
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the


CHAPTER I




BOOK ONE: 1805




by Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi

War and Peace

http://www.fullbooks.com/War-and-Peace1.html
